Mathematics and mechanization review — 2026-10-03

The maintained claims survive at their declared finite, conditional, exact,
or numerical scopes. The repairs below preserve those scopes and restore an
unsupported universal statement in the F34 toy by a general linear-algebra
proof. This is a self-review, with a separate adversarial pass; it is not an
independent external review or a certificate that the toys describe nature.

The initial state was committed before changes as 4d72f5c. No paper source,
paper section, submission document, or paper include was changed. There are
no Lean sources or Lean project/toolchain files in this repository. Its local
mechanizations are Python computations and exact certificates, with written
general proofs where indicated. Selected imported Lean declarations were
inspected and their modules freshly built; those builds do not establish
the physical applicability premises of an imported theorem.

Repairs

1. PROG2 connected-copy gauge certificate. The written incidence-image
   argument covers every fixed nonempty connected carrier. The constructor
   previously excluded zero/one-edge carriers and did not reject disconnected
   inputs. It now handles the trivial cases, validates vertices/edges, and
   rejects the invalid global-product argument on disconnected carriers.
   Exact regressions cover all 44 connected labeled simple graphs through
   four vertices, with orientation controls. The general proof remains the
   connected-incidence image argument, rather than this finite regression.

2. PROG2 reproducibility. The Step-4 renderer now emits the already-released
   honest budget-truncation conclusion instead of its earlier unsupported
   infinite-continuation wording. The required Step-6 audit log is now tracked
   through a narrow ignore exception, so the validator works in a clean copy.
   The external audit remains a floating diagnostic, not the exact gauge proof.

3. Single-factor clean-separation theorem (Step 61). The validator now rebuilds
   every released non-code artifact in a temporary directory and checks bytes.
   It also constructs actual factorization-defect pairs for N=3..12, checks the
   witness IDs/readout equalities/mass inequalities, and exercises same-mass and
   multifactor controls. The written theorem's universal hinge is that a
   passing single-factor substrate has residual N-1>=2 and 2(N-1)>0 massive
   charged vectors. Its deliberately coarse confinement readout identifies
   these with massless residual generators. This is a toy-grammar theorem,
   not a theorem about confinement or the Standard Model in nature.

4. S3 generator/lattice construction. The results already contained a stable
   ledger anchor absent from the renderer. The renderer and its source/schema
   manifests now reproduce that release. Exact commutant, charge/trace, coset,
   generator-action and Smith-normal-form calculations retain their strength.
   SU(5) connectedness and homotopy facts are named imports, not consequences
   of the finite matrix computation. The Pati-Salam comparison also has 3/8;
   this ratio does not uniquely discriminate the parent.

5. S6 record census. The minimum of separately computed UV and residual
   singlet dimensions is only an upper bound on a restriction-map rank. The
   previous code comment and some generated prose called this a common basis
   or actual lift. These are now explicitly candidate channels and declared
   identifications. No UV-to-selected-component restriction map, nonzero VEV
   image, Grassmann quotient, EOM quotient or independent invariant-operator
   basis has been constructed. All 556 candidate lifts / 404 candidate labels
   and branch/threshold results are unchanged. This aligns the support with
   the caveat already in the current paper, without weakening a main theorem.

6. F34 full-boundary versus partial-readout toy. Step 53 sampled SVD/gauge
   reconstructions, which do not prove its 'any two preimages' assertion.
   repairs/f34_exact_factorization/PROOF.txt supplies a general theorem:
   for M=LR^T of rank d, all same-size factorizations of M form exactly one
   GL(d) orbit, with a unique explicit change of basis. Six modular rank-27
   certificates establish applicability to the represented seed-101/202/303
   binary-rational frames. Exact complex-rational reconstruction and a
   rank-deficient nongauge counterexample exercise its hinge. An exact
   complement permutation on seed 101 preserves the left reduced state but
   changes a right observable, supplying the partial-readout obstruction.
   Raw matrix equality is crucial. For normalized rays one must also quotient
   overall scalar multiplication; a GL-invariant raw norm or Gram spectrum
   does not descend to a normalized ray without a scale convention. Both the
   raw and projective statements, and this counterexample, are written out.
   This is written proof plus exact Python certificates, not a Lean proof.

7. QM-GR Steps 27/28. Their validators depended on ignored local NPZ files.
   They now reconstruct the operators and histories from tracked inputs;
   Step 28 checks every stored history state and potential against that
   reconstruction. Compatible-clock constraints remain finite constructions:
   compatibility is engineered, not a derived physical clock dynamics.

8. Historical Step 69 source pin (old finding F-002). Its frozen score-carrier
   expected digest was computed from the same current file it was checking.
   Both builder and validator now use the literal reviewed digest. Changing
   the source fails even if the stored conclusion is left unchanged. The
   historical record implication is still superseded by the S6 candidate
   ablation and is not revived by this integrity repair.

Independent mathematical checks and adversarial self-review

The independent oracle enumerates semistandard tableaux and uses weight
characters with the Weyl denominator, rather than the production LR routine.
It checks dimensions, conjugation, Dynkin indices and cubic anomalies for all
14 canonical representations; all 368 ordered triple singlet counts agree.
The same oracle checks all 65 distinct singlet queries actually made by the
complete S6-v3 census. These checks verify representation dimensions, not
realization of the candidate channels as physical record operators.

Tampering controls reject a forged Step-61 exemplar with unchanged summary
counts, a forged Step-28 history with unchanged verdicts, and a changed
Step-69 score source. Existing Q1/Q2/Q5/S1/S3/S4/S5/P1 controls also ran.
The F34 proof was reviewed for quantifiers, rank loss, transpose versus
adjoint, raw versus projective readout, and the finite-to-universal bridge.

Claim coverage and retained mathematical boundaries

claim_coverage.json reviews every one of the 42 maintained registry records,
plus the breadth/import statements omitted from that inventory. The registry
statuses are retained; withdrawn historical claims are not acceptance targets.

- S1: the finite carrier and clean-branch selection are relative to the charge,
  representation, quotient and scalar-cap conventions. 'Admits a clean branch'
  is not 'every branch is clean'. Higher-arity branch dynamics is not derived.
- S2/Step 44: the three-active-factor scalar obstruction follows from 2^3>6
  under the declared component cap. Step 43's old numerical census remains
  stale relative to the repaired carrier. Historical Steps 43/44 still have
  summary-based validators; they are not full regeneration certificates for
  the maintained carrier. Step 61's corresponding weakness is now repaired.
- S4: the template content orbit is unique under its declared equivalences.
  Symbolic charged mass ranks 14N and neutral deficiencies N hold for the
  materialized N=1..4 grammar. No measured Yukawas or selection of N=3 follows.
- S5: the two constructed architecture families both close, so architecture
  remains underdetermined. F47 percentages depend on the declared measure and
  strict threshold; the realized score 2.75 is excluded at threshold 2.75.
- Q1/Q2: the 54 field-plus-background records and the abstract Boolean carrier
  are distinct. Current is part of the QM readout; the forward control changes
  background potential. Coordinate conditional-mean completions commute
  exactly. No quantize/curve commutator or adversarial family uniqueness follows.
- Q5: primal/dual min-cut values, complementary slackness and chamber derivatives
  are exact finite-graph facts. Bond-dimension entropy trends and MMI ledgers
  are sampled floating computations. Area gluing agrees on the tested probes;
  Born gluing fails there. Neither continuum RT equality nor Einstein response
  is supplied by these finite ledgers.
- Q7/G1/G2: fixed points and stability crossings are numerical, sample bounded,
  and criterion dependent. They are not interval-certified existence or
  bifurcation theorems, an in-layer Lambda law, or physical singularity resolution.
- P1/PROG3: exact cut fingerprints and signed kernel intervals are certified on
  the finite declared carriers. Bounded forward-reachable sets are not symmetric
  move orbits: explicit subdivisions/inverse moves defeat that promotion. State
  underdetermination and quotient irreducibility remain typed open programs.
- P2/P3: assumed perfect-record dephasing is LOCC and therefore BMV-null.
  Geometry diagonality alone does not force that channel. Physical record
  formation and physical operator persistence remain unresolved dynamical inputs.
- Bell: the CHSH construction and the local deterministic bound are valid.
  A common mathematical carrier is not a Bell-local hidden-variable mechanism.
  Record-access complementarity is relative to the admissible joint class.
- E032: the definability statement is conditional on the supplied source
  language/closure and taxonomy. It does not establish a strict physical
  extension of QM or an operational measurement discriminator.

Precise imported statements and items for the later paper pass

Foundations III's no_total_algebra/no_total_decoder requires two cells with
the same primitive pair and different statuses. If status=decoder(op(pair)),
their statuses would be equal, a contradiction. It does not rule out arbitrary
binary operations on six symbols: op(x,y)=x is an immediate counterexample
to that stronger reading. Current main-paper line 342 is unqualified; the
Appendix at line 1329 already includes 'decodes judgment status'. Use the
qualified statement consistently in the later paper pass. The inspected
Lean declaration and classifier countermodel build under Lean 4.28.0.

F34 descent is on the readout image (or a surjective declared codomain).
F37 requires a declared admissible joint class; the pairing always exists as
a mathematical map. F49 is deterministic fiber factorization; it includes
the declared DirectRoute disjunct, and a nonlocal residual additionally
requires failure of a supplied locality package. The current Appendix's
two-disjunct shorthand must either declare DirectRoute unavailable or restore
that disjunct. It must not be used as a probabilistic Bell-locality theorem.
No paper edits were made. These corrections concern import scope and do not
require a new material downgrade of the maintained headline claims.

F23 imports a fiber-supported measure and stability data; it does not derive
the Born rule or its measure. F24 proves role-split/refinement descent; its
architecture-family names are declared statuses rather than an exhaustive
physical classification. F39 assumes its mixing chain rule, the relevant
combine monotonicity, and the zero/injectivity identification. It does not
identify arbitrary physical entropy with a fiber volume. The local finite
min-cut/entropy recognition must carry its own tensor and measure premises.
F27 uses an actual supplied orbit relation; F48 needs an actual gluing class.
Neither theorem turns a candidate token census into derived physical dynamics.

Validation and reproducibility

validation_receipts.json records the original 19-command maintained/open
program sweep (16 passes, 3 reproducibility failures), the historical 131-step
sweep (129 passes, 2 missing-NPZ failures), and repaired final replays. The
failed cases all pass after the changes. A passing historical validator only
certifies its declared checks; it does not reverse any recorded withdrawal.
Registry/anchor controls, three atlas node gates, atlas structural coverage,
five atlas mutation controls, JSON parsing and Python syntax checks also pass.
Paper-source hashes are unchanged relative to the initial checkpoint.

Reproduce the changed validators and new independent/tampering checks with:
  python3 review_2026/mathematics_audit_20261003/run_checks.py --output /tmp/sm-qm-gr-audit.json
Add --all for the maintained/open-program and all historical validator sweep.
The runner makes separate scratch copies using tracked and nonignored files,
so missing ignored local artifacts cannot silently supply required evidence.
Read the receipts alongside the stated scopes: no test substitutes for an
unproved universal theorem, an unbuilt realization bridge, or external review.
